# Goal

Let's do an integration session as I've been taking quite some material in the past few days.

# Debrief

# Notes

So, what did I study?...

We have basic chapter 9, pytorch fundamental chapter 10, chapter 11 that is about deep learning training? (🟡 yes, it is.), chapter 12 that is about CNNs so I skipped it, chapter 13 that is about basic RNNs, and chapter 14 on which I currently am that is about RNN for NLP. With next chapter 15 being the main chapter on transformers and chatbots. 

And the rest chapters are not as urgent or important to me, like speeding up transformers, multimodal transformers, gans, RL.





---
Let's repeat that again in the blind. DL: 
- chapter 9 which is about basics of nn's
- chapter 10 which is about pytorch basics
- chapter 11 which is about basics of DL training
- chapter 12 (skipped) which is about CNNs
- chapter 13 which is about RNNs, sequence processing
- chapter 14 which is about RNNs for NLP
- chapter 15 (to study) which is about transformers & NLP
- chapter 16 (skip) which is about multimodal transformers
- chapter 17 (skip) which is about speeding up transformers
- chapter 18 (skip) which is about GANs, autoencoders, diffusion models
- chapter 19 (skip) RL

So once I'm done with chapter 14, and then 15, and I have studied them deeply I go next to ARENA etc.

So let's start with repeating things from chapter 13, then chapter 14, cause those I have integrated poorly.

---

Chapter 13 is about processing time series, or data sequences where ordering of instances plays a role.

Doing that with fully connected NNs is hard, and we loose the information of instance ordering.

So, we need a new architecture to use ordering information. Here comes RNNs.

Say we have one RNN neuron, then to predict x_2 instance, it will take in not only x_2, but also the prediction network has produced from x_1, i.e. ^y_1. So each RNN neuron is taking as an input info both training instance and nn's output from the past instance.

In a multilayered deep RNN, it works as follows. Each neuron gets both as input the past layer's activations for the current x_2 instance, and the activation vector of its own layer for the past x_1 instance.

The issue with RNNs is that they have awfully short memory. If we use it for NLP it is similar to reading the sentence and by its end forgetting how it started.

🔴 => to be honest my recall of RNN chapter is pretty bad, I'll now go through my notes, crafting a narrative to recall for future:

---

So RNNs.

Fundamentals: That I got pretty accurately with passing past output, and how it works for layered RNNs.

But there are also types of RNNs:
1. seq2seq -- time series prediction.
2. seq2vec -- sentiment analysis based on text
3. vec2seq -- input image to output image caption
4. encoder-decoder -- seq2vec + vec2seq -- translation.

And training RNNs. Everything is business as usual with backpropagation, only we also have weight for each neuron activation from the past training isntance. And depending on RNN type the loss function might ignore some of the outputs, as say in seq2vec RNN.

(Okay, so adding RNN types is the main improvement for RNN fundamentals.)

I do skip predicting time series with different models, and even RNNs, so in a way I don't talk about it. Basically I ignore completely time-series forecasting, super fine with that atm.

Though we do need to talk about handling long sequences with RNNs. So we improve on the architecture as RNNs have super short term memory by using LSTM, and GRU.

Training RNNs on long sequences means we loop it for a long time! It is unrolled for quite a while! This creates the familiar issue to us of vanishing, exploding gradients! and as mentioned short-term memory.

On vanishing/exploding gradients I'll just note that all the regular stuff of good weight initialization, better optimizers and dropout rates work. Yet, non-saturating function, say ReLU, is no go.

Why? Because slight decrease in activation in an early training instance will go on throughout all the other instance after it, this would explode gradients damaging training. So instead you have to use saturating activation functions and small learning rates. Also gradient clipping.

Now short memory. Two architectures, LSTM's and GRU.

LSTMs (long short term memory) which pretty much sums up the difference.

Basically instead of just one stream of information from past training instance, LSTM's also have long-term memory stream. The idea is simple, model can also learn what information it should preserve and when it should use it. This is the long-term stream. So cells output both short-term info (h1), and long-term info (c1). (I will not go into the details of how that works, it's too detailed for my goals.)

GRU is a simplified architecture of LSTM that combines long and short term streams into one: h_t. So its easier to train and it usually performs better.

You can even use CNNs for long-sequences, but I scoped that out.

That's all I need to +- recall from 13th chapter.

Now let's go through 14th.

---

So we learned basics of RNNs, and long-sequence RNNs like LSTM and GRU. Now let's apply it to the real deal of NLP.

We'll explore three things. Predicting the next character (seq2seq), sentiment analysis (seq2vec), and translation (encoder, decoder).

So let's start with next character prediction (seq2seq).

We have to do quite some preprocessing to start working with text.

First, we can use characters, but we also could use tokenizers.
Once we have converted text into numbers, we need to do that properly with embeddings, so similar numbers have similar meanings. This is learned on the fly as model learns its weights.

(Both of those we'll heavily benefit from using pretrained stuff from bigger past datasets.)

Split data into windows and mini batches, say 50 characters. 

Then we train the model and embeddings, using GRU, dropout.

To run the model we control the temperature (randomness of teh outputs), also picking next tokens/ characters with p prob.

---

When we're training our sentiment analysis, instead of splitting text into characters, we split it into tokens (usually using pretrained one, say for GPT2), then we pass it through embedding layer, also could be starting with a pre-trained one. Then we train the model, then we make predictions.

So again, we have our text. We use tokenizers to decide what tokens to use for input and output for the model. Those tokens, say (the etc.) are usually the most common meaningful small parts of text. Then we take these tokens and pass them through embedding, so that similar tokens have similar values, as model have very strong bias for that.

While both embeddings and tokens can be trained on our own, we usually take the pretrained versions from some bigger dataset/ models.

We then use those to train our model, say with RNN for sentiment analysis, it would be GRU seq2vec. With loss function tailored to that. Model we'll learn appropriate weights both for past layer activations and info from past training examples.

The data would have to be split into windows and batches. Window is like a smaller sequence we feed into the model which it uses to predict the next character/token, and mini batches is just what we use during training instead of the whole dataset to do gradient descent.

Though in sentiment analysis I presume we feed in whole reviews, maybe doing several in a mini batch.

Once model is trained, we run it in character chase by predicting the next token/character based on its p probability, and we also apply temperature to make predictions more "unpredictable" or the other way around.

---

Now again on sentiment. It is seq2vec. How do we train? What happens with windows and minibatches?

(If we want to tokenize several reviews at once we can easily do that. But the trick is that we afterwards want to put them together in an integer tensor, creating our dataset. To merge integer tensor they must be of same length, so we both use <pad> token, and length clipping. We then use attention_mask to create tensor with 0 as pad's and we multiply the two to get clean tensor without pads.)

(There are several different tokenizer techniques, on that later.)

---

To restate.

1. We download the dataset, split it into test, train, valid.
2. We create vocabulary for the model, either through characters or tokens.
3. Then we embed it to properly train the model, as similar tokens should have similar values.
4. We split the data into mini batches. Say windows for text prediction, and 256 reviews that are truncated and padded for sentiment analysis.
5. For sentiment analysis we use packed_seq smth to ignore padded tokens in reviews.
6. We train the model on appropriate loss, it learns several weights, we probably use dropout and adam optimizer.
7. To make inference on the model for text prediction we use token probabilities to draw them from, and we control "randomness" with temperature. We run it in a way as to avoid computational graph creation in pytorch.

Now let's talk about using pretrained tokenizers, embeddings and practically whole models.

---

To blidly restate 6th millionth time. So we have our RNNs and we want to do NLP stuff with it. Be it next character prediction or sentiment analysis.

1. We start with the text dataset we have. We split it into test, train, and validation parts.
2. For our model to work with data we need to split text further and make it numbers. We can either do dictionary with characters and their IDs, or more intelligently we can tokenize text into popular subwords or small words and put them as dictionary with corresponding id.
3. We can then use that dictionary to translate text into id values and feed it into the model, it would then output another id values, and we'll translate them back and get text. 
    Only problem being that models have very strong bias for adjacent values meaning similar things. So training would be poor. To fix that instead of id dictionary we convertt id's into dense embedding vector, where each token corresponds to some vector, and closeby vectors mean similar things. (In fact we can even do math with those vectors that makes sense, like king-men+women≈queen). That dense embedding learns vector values besides model weights. (But we usually, similar to tokenizing text take pretrained solutions.)
4. Now we have split the text into tokens and put them into vector embeddings, we have a good way to give model text data which it could easily work with. Now we also need to split our dataset into mini-batches for model training (this happens in any real deep learning scenario). For token-character prediction we'll also have sliding windows which we'll act as x-y pairs, but for sentiment analysis it is just padded-truncated tokenized embedded reviews (same token size) with their corresponding sentiment. (We also use padded seq thing to ignore pad tokens.)
5. Finally, we have everything ready for model training. We define our RNN, likely GRU, we start with embedding layer that will take in tokenized batches (which we must've done during mini-batch processing) (maybe we also likely re-use someone's embeddings), then we have several GRU layers, and output depending on the task, say binary classification in case of sentiment analysis, and (🟡 what is the output layer for character prediction? I guess the same N as characters. But what would that be for token predictions? Same as number of tokens? That sounds huge! => Indeed, cursor says it is the size of token dictionary, which can be 32k, 50k and 100k+).
6. And now we can run inference! Just within no_grad.































