# Goal

The goal is to repeat recalling and explaining all DL related things before going into transformers.

# Debrief
1. 

# Notes

I want to go right away to the end of talking about RNNs, LSTMs, and GRUs.

Then talk about all the rest. 

We have sequential data where ordering matters. Using deep fully connected NNs isn't a perfect architecture for it because we feed into it one training instance at a time -- information about ordering is lost.

So we can simply improve on that architecture by passing to the neuron information about t-1 training instance too. Specifically in a deep RNN neuron in a layer receives both the neuron activations of all of its input neurons, and of its own layer's neurons from the x_(t-1) training instance.

But that is only the info from the past training instance, this architecture still fails to work well with longer sequences (also gradient explosion/vanishing problem, talk in a sec.).

To fix that we have architectures that incorporate the idea of long-term memory, which model also learns with weights. Particularly LSTM with both short and long term memory stream that is controlled by 3 gates (tahn and logistic functions), and GRU which has just memory stream because it puts in one both long and short term memory, and there are other simplifications it does that make it work well.

Let's come back for a second to RNNs. Basically we have an additional set of weight (from past training instance to current), and those weights are learned the same with the same backpropagation, this is called backprop through time. 

What else is there to mention about RNNs? There's training, actual connections in a deep version, problems with vanishing/exploding gradients, and very short-term memory. Can't think of anything else. ☑️

So let's talk gradients. Basically because RNN is looped over training instances, as in the info is passing from one to the other recursively, a gradient that is just above one, say 2, looped over 50 times, becomes a very huge number, which makes training do poorly as we want well sized gradient descent steps, no jumping around as it would be with this case. Vanishing is the same problem but say we have 0.5 number, number just a bit less than 1. Looped over 50 times it would just as well become a hugely small number. 

To fix that we do gradient clipping, neuron dropout, but mainly saturating activation functions, say sigmoid vs non-saturating say ReLU. Learning rate warm up etc.

Cool, now let's comeback to LSTMs and GRUs.

Oh, types of RNNs!
1. Seq2seq -- time series forecasting
2. seq2vec -- sentiment analysis
3. vec2seq -- image caption
4. encoder-decoder -- seq2vec + vec2seq -- text translation

Basically the way you do seq2vec is just use model's last output, not intermediate ones, and if you want to output seq, you use them all.

Let's zoom in into encoder-decoder architecture. For some task, say translation, it is quite useful to first encode the meaning of a sentence or phrase into a vector, and then use that vector as the basis for decoding/ translating it into another language.

Let's keep to the example of text translation, as I'm not sure how text generation exactly works atm with encoder-decoder architecture.  

You take in tokenized embeddings as input, one token at a time, finishing one training instance. You have your GRU memory stream, model learned weights and process info well. Lastly it produces a vector (since we ignore all other past outputs) for each training instance, say some english sentence. (And for that to happen we had to feed it one token at a time, where model would produce output for that token, which would then be fed to it on the next token until end of traning instance.)

Then decoder picks up that vector, and produces a sequence of tokens as translated sentence output. It outputs one token at a time, and we feed that token back to the model as input from past training instance (when we train the model we feed it always the right token based on our training target, regardless of what produces, this is called teacher forcing and it meaningfully improves training). Because we don't ignore model's outputs (as in all but last), this is sequence output.

Now a bit more on the whole process of text translation training.

Models can't work with text, so we have to convert it to numbers. We also need to split text into small workable pieces, one way is characters, but it is too small, a better way is tokens, frequent subwords we use in language. Tokens are basically the smallest biggest workable chunk of text for models. There are different ways of finding good tokens, we can search it ourselves based on the text for our problem, but we also can just use pretrained versions from other tasks.

So now we have a huge dictionary, say 50-80k with token and its corresponding id. We can use those id's as model numbers, but models have huge bias for similar values meaning same things, so to improve our training and performance we can train a small model to embed those 80k tokens into smaller, say 300 vector embedding where each token has a corresponding 300-dim vector, and similar meaning text have similar vectors. In fact, with such embeddings we can even do text math, like queen=kind-man+women !

The output layer of decoder is just all tokens in a dictionary with some value, which we then pass through softmax to give 0-1 values, i.e. probabilities. So it's kind of classification problem, so we use cross entropy as loss function!

When we're doing translation, say english to spanish, we need to tokenize and embed both. But spanish is fed into decoder. 

---

I think this is the main deal about RNNs and RNNs for NLP.

Let's recap some prior stuff about DL basics and training.

Basically in model training we need to worry about:

Learning rate -- do learning rate warmup, choose the right value by progressively increasing its order of magnitude and plotting validation score, stop when it goes back up and take 10x less value for learning rate. Also can do learning rate warm up*, which is a dumb name as you first do high values, and then lower ones...

Batch size -- 32 training instance, but you start with all you can fit into GPU RAM and hope with learning rate warmup training will be good. If it isn't go for batch size.

Training deep learning models for a while wasn't really successful, this is beacuse of poor weight initialization, poor activation functions (you want nonsaturating, not the saturating ones like sigmoid to keep signal going through gradient changes).

You frequently reuse several first layers, tokens, and embeddings of models to save yourself enormous time. You first freeze their weights not to damage during training, then you re-use but keep more flexible middle layers, and as cherry on top train your own last few layers. This works because deep learning models use feature hierarchy, building on top of its representations, but sometimes we want to use smaller simpler representations and to do that we can use non-sequential (is that the name?☑️🟡 => wide and deep NNs, actually non-sequuential is the name!) models where first few layers could be connected to the output layer.

We use dropout neurons where some neurons randomly are deactivated during training so that model training is more robust and less overfitting. As DNNs are very powerful and very prone to overfitting.

If you have time you can play with optimizers, i.e. gradient descent vs other techniques, like adam which uses momentum to change weights. The idea is to take into account past gradients too, and instead of speed as total value, use acceleration as weight updating value. (There are other techniques too...)

Right, off course the number of layers and number of neurons in them. Basically do same number of neurons, go big enough and slowly decrease their number. This way you're sure you have sufficiently powerful model to learn needed representations and you just make sure it doesn't overfit. Previously people used pyramid model, but we don't do it nowadays as fully layered one usually performs better. We also want to avoid bottleneck layers which prohibit model from learning useful representations afterwards.

---

More on the super basics of NNs and DNNs. Basically the idea was quite old, like proposed in 1940s. First for logical operations, then someone improved on it by adding weights and bias and making neurons not binary and adding an activation function. Then one godfather of AI made a report saying how its bs because NNs can't even do XOR, because they use linear functions! The solution is to just make them deeper and bigger. The problem is how you train such models, mainly, how you trace which connection and how much contributed to loss function (i.e. total loss), and hence by how much to change those connections. Here comes backprop that was invented even not for NNs, which goes back through the network calculating gradients i.e. who contributed how much to loss. Then there still were problems with training NNs, but with better weight initialization, better activation functions, optimizers, learning rates, MUCH MORE DATA, AND MUCH MORE COMPUTE we have them finally do super crazy useful stuff! 

Activation functions allow DNNs to model very complex data, otherwise it would've been just one big linear function. Think of activation functions as pieces which model uses to "stitch together" and model the data it works with.

What else? I think this is a good basics summary, I talked about training DNNs, RNNs and RNNs for NLP. I think this is mostly it. => 🟡 => right, hello, pytorch.

---

Let's recall pytorch!

Main library for DNN training, huggingface is the main library for DNN stuff too, but it a bit higher level, you can download models, use transformer etc.

PyTorch uses tensors, matrix, multidimensional array to represent data. It can be one data type at a time, but can be: complex number > float > integer > bool. It drops to most universal if you have several data types in it.

The main shtick of pytorch is that when you train the model it keep track of computations model did during forward pass (keep them in computational graph), which it then uses to quickly calculate backprop with! So its just super easy to calculate backprop because of this computational graph that keeps track of operations.

You use nn. Module as the main class/ object for training NNs, it has all useful methods and parameters you'd need during training. You frequently would create you own custom modules instead of reusing default ones like nn.Linear.

You also have splitting data into batches, you'll have to convert them in a special data type for that, same with training models, there's a special Parameter data type, which is a subtype of tensor so it inherits all its functionality, the only difference is that during nn training it is recognized as parameter and not random tensor so we keep track of its computational graph. During inference we explicitly say to not keep track of computational graph as this speeds up training.

You define loss function, all the basics. I think that's the main parst of pytorch.

🟡 Right, didn't mention that pytroch allows you to work with gpus, tpu etc, which REALLY speeds up training compared to other libraries that use CPUs.

you also have saving, loading pytorch models and to compress you just use huggingface to do it safely.

---

🔴 Didn't talk about beam and attention mechanisms, need to repeat for myself first.

Let's spend a bit more time on RNN for NLPs before going further to transformers.

---

So I did learn more about transformers, and now lets try explaining them.

Basically LSTM/GRUs are holding us down from doing more complex NLP. So we get rid of them.

Instead we use self-attention layer✨✨✨ that calculates how much each word is related to itself and all the other words in the sentence. Let's keep on rolling with our NMT example english to spanish.

We take our english sentence, tokenize it, embed it, then use those embedding values to calculate positional encoding, which is basically the position of token in a sentence. Each token position like first, second, third gets unique value that is generated by different sines and cosines. This value is called positional encoding.

So now for each token we have its tokenized embedding value and positional encoding. The sum of those two we'll be used for self-attention layer.

First, we take some learned weights (named W_q_enc) and transform sum of positional encoding and tokenized embedding into the same sized vector, but now transformed with those weights. This vector is called query.

Say we have translation example of "Let's go" to "Vamos". We start with calculating the query value for word Let's as part of encoder.

We're trying to understand relation between that word and all overs in a sentence, including itself. 

For that we first calculate take each token "Let's" and "go" and calculate Key value for each based on their tokenized embeddings and positional encodings using new set of weights called W_k_enc.

Then we check the similarity between the query of token Let's and its keys of Let's and go through simple dot product. Then we run that dot product through softmax to get nice probabilities.

To get self-attention values we can pass to decoder we need just last few things. We use last set of unique weights called W_v_enc to transform our original tokenized embedding + positional encoding sum for each token in a sentence to get Value number which can then me scaled based on the probabilities calculated by the softmax. Lastly we add again to it tokenized embedding and positional encoding as it is important useful info and that last fucking vector is what we pass to the decoder for that "Let's" token!...

Query is the word in interest.
Keys are the words we're interested to compare it with.
Value is the number for each token we'll scale similarity probability with.

Now we can pass those values to the decoder.

---

Decoder starts the same, we have our spanish token dictionary, we do our spanish embedding of it, and we calculate positional encoding of target phrase for each token. 

Then we similarly calculate the attention layer but for the decoder. 

Now we have our decoder self-attention values for each token (that are also summed up with tokenized embeddings and positional encodings). 

---

Now we can calculate encoder-decoder attention layer. This is crucial. While self-attention both of encoder and decoder is about how words relate to each other in training english sentence, or target spanish sentence. Encoder-decoder attention is about what encoder's token should decoder pay attention to when translating something. This really drives the needle and makes long-term memory and all that stuff obsolete as we can just directly figure out what to use.

So we start with decoder's <SOS> token and we use W_q_enc-dec to get Query values. Then we use W_k_enc-dec weights to get Key values of each encoder's token "Let's" and "go". Now we calculate their similarity dot product, and pass it through softmax. Then we calculate Value using W_v_enc-dec for each encoder's token. Multiplying by softmax's outputs we get encoder-decoder attention values, and by adding residual connections we can pass those values to the fully connected output layer! And voila, after another softmax you get your token prediction! 

We get ```vamos``` as the first prediction. We feed that into the next token prediction as input, for it we get ```<EOS>``` as output, and WE'RE DONE!!! QUANTA BAM!!!!!

---

This is a simplified architecture of transformer. For bigger problems and model we apply normalization after both positional encoding and self-attention layer both for encoder and decoder. Use slightly different dot production similarity function. We also use in each an NN for sum-up'ed values of tokenized embedding and positional encoder, before using those values for query,key,value calculation.


