# Goal

I have taken in quite a few material on transformers, and now I want to integrate it. Maybe after explaining it I will also do more DL integration.

# Debrief

1. Mainly that in normal attention layer values are calculated for all words, and then summed up with softmax values, and this preserves the token as it relates to itself heavily. You can even see that clearly in all attention maps where they have a diagonal pattern!
2. Second just reminder that decoder self attention uses masking.
3. Third that encoder-decoder cross atteniton layer takes decedor's output as query and aske what encoder inputs are related to it. which makes sense! so encoder values are keys and values, but we alsa calculate the value for decoder's outputted tokens  which helps as info in predicting the next token!

# Notes

## Transformers

Basically we had RNNs, and then LSTMs, and we can use them for NLP but they are not that good for long sequence processing. One reason is that NLP is long context dependent. If you have long sequence, first few words of an essay could change entirely its meaning. And if you forget those first few words you have lost the context.

We have talked about how we can use LSTMs to store some long-term memory, and teach that to the model, but still, those architecture are not good enough at long-sequence processing. But we already had an idea of attention, where we help model with what parts of the text it should focus on.

In 2017 new architecture was proposed -- Transformers. 

The main idea behind transformers is to use attention mechanisms more seriously, and get rid of looping inputs like in RNNs and convey information about words positions differently. And we also scale it greatly, and because of its structure it is also really good for parallelization, hence scale, hence god bless GPUs.

### Encoder

So, what are the steps.

Say we again want to do NMT, english to spanish. We would also have encoder and decoder models.

We start with training english tokenizer (or better using a pretrained one), then training tokenized embeddings. And now we have our dictionary of tokens with corresponding dense embedded vectors where closer meaning tokens are adjacent and we can do some math on it.

Because transformer doesn't loop past training instance outputs to new ones, we don't have information about token positions given to model in any way. 

This is obviously crucial for text. So in original atteniton is all you need that introduced transformer architecture they have used sines and cosines waves to encode information for order of tokens, like first has those values, second those etc. Turns out this does better in training than simple ascending values between zero and one.

Say we have an example sentence: "Lets go" Presume it is just two tokens.

We now have two tokenized embeddings corresponding to each word in our token dictionary.

We input them into the model, adding positional encoding vectors for the first token and second one based on their unique cosine and sine values. This is called positional encoding.

Now we have the sum of those two as two vectors. These vectors represent some uncontextualized information about word lets and go, and about their order in the sequence.

The goal of transformer is to progessively add context to each token so that by the end we have very rich context/ meaning, that helps us to predict the next token, or decode the sentence and translate it to spanish.

So we start with passing it through self-attention layer. 

The first self-attention layer (though in our example the last) in **encoder calculates how each word relates to every other word in a sequence including itself. Then it calculates how vectors of each token should change given those relations (context). Those changes represent meaning change of those tokens given their surrounding context.**

This is the main gist of transformer. It does so by calculating three things: Query, Key, and Value.

**So let me repeat. The main goal of attention layers is that they change meaning of tokens given its context of other tokens and position. Specifically, we start with token vectors that encodes abstract meaning of the word with its position (positional encoding). Then we look for how it relates to all other tokens in an inputted sequence + itself. Then we change that vector based on that context, ideally in the end having a vector that represent tokens true meaning given the context of the sequence.**

This is done by calculating three things: Query, Key, and Value. Let's go to our example of "Lets go" sentence. Since this is encoders self-attention layer we just focus on how tokens in our english sequence influence each other.

We start with word lets. We calculate its query given some weight matrix W_q_enc + bias. These weigths were tweaked and found appropriate by the model throughout the training.

They give us query value for word let's. Think of it as question for token Lets of how it relates to other tokens in sentence.

Next we calculate keys for all tokens in a sequence. So for word lets and go. For that we use W_k_enc weight matrix and its bias term. Same for all tokens in the sequence. We get key values for each tokens.

We want to understand how those key vectors relate to query vector. Specifically, we can look its similarity for proxy of relation, meaning, context, attendance between tokens. Calculating similarity between vectors is surprisingly easy, we can just take the dot product! (There are details, and this is not always the used formula but still.)

Now we have dot product of query token Lets and key tokens Lets and go. Specifically, those values represent the similarity, or attendance, or relation between the words. We can pass those similarity values through softmax function to get nice probabilities. These probabilities tell how strongly each token relates to other in the sentence!

Now let's recall that we're trying to get new vectors for each token that represent new contextualizing meaning of those tokens.

We have how much each token relates to other tokens. Now we calculate the value vector for the word lets with matrix W_v_enc and bias term (also trained by the model). 

(🟡 ok, here i'm uncertain but here's my best guess:) 

We then multiply softmax values for each corresponding token embedding (+ positional encoding), say word lets has 80%, while go 20%. We multiply them and add to the Lets value vector to get the final output for the token Let's that is now enriched with the new context and information about it.

🔴, so that's wrong.

We calculate value vectors for both tokens, in fact every token in the sequence. For that we use the same matrix W_v_enc, all the same for every token. Now we have values for all tokens, we multiply them by the softmax attention probabilities and summing up we get the final self-attention value for that token that now has all the context from other tokens, enriched with meaning. We also add again to it tokenized embedding and positional encoding for nicer information flow so NNs doesn't have to pass it through on its own. (The final vector is not an entirely new token/ word because we use its own value, and it heavily relates, so it will always have high values for itself, you can see that clearly in attention maps!!! there's always this diagonal pattern! :) )

In more complex transformer architectures we pass that new contextually enriched token vector to the MLP (which actually accounts for 2/3 of parameters in bigger models like gpt-3). We also apply normalization for better information flow.

But sticking to our simple translation example on a super basic encoder-decoder transformer. We do the same calculation but for word go, and now we have two context enriched vectors for both words that we pass to decoder.

### Decoder

So let's talk decoder.

We have spanish text, we tokenzed it with different dictionary. Now we have our dictionary, we run another dense embedding model so now we have our token dictionary with vectors. We also do sine and cosine positional encodings addition to the target sentence tokens and we're ready to go.

Target phrase is: "Vamos <EOS>" where eos is end of sequence token to stop generating outputs.

We also have a self-attention layer but for decoder. It does the same as encoder but for decoder's values. When we start encoder we pass to it <SOS> token, i.e. start of sequence so it starts to generate stuff.

But attention layer for decoder is unique. It is masked. Which means that it looks for relation between token prior to that token (yes including it too, but not future ones). That way model can't cheat. So if target phrase is "vamos tia e hermano", and model has just translated "vamos tia" it can only look for relations between those words, not between "e" and "hermano". Hence it is called masked attention. All else is the same, we have another QKV matrices etc. 

And we add tokenized embeddings and positional encodings to the outputs of that masked attention layer. Getting the final contextualized token vectors that are passed further to:...

### Encoder-Decoder

Next we have the fun part of cross encoder-decoder attention. Where in this attention layer we take in info both from encoder's final outputted contextualized vectors, and those produced by the decoder's masked self-attention layer.

This way model can learn which words it should pay attention to.

So we pass the "Lets go" vectors, and the starting token <SOS>. Next model decides what to pay attention to, doing QVK calculations and passes. ...

🔴 frankly this part is very blurry, not sure I'm getting what is hapenning.

Aha! 

<SOS> is the query, while lets and go are keys and values => MAKES SENSE!

Which outputs attention vectors for encoder's vectors "lets" and "go". And then to those vectors we add residual connection of output of decoder's attention layer, so it doesn't have to remember and pass it through all those computations itself! 

And these last two summed up vectors gives us necessary info for the final fully connected output layer that would output values for each token in the dictionary. We then pass those values through softmax and we get probabilities for next predicted token.

We can either pick the most probable, or sample token based on their probabilities, we can also use beam search where we sampple a few tokens and pick the most likely sequence of tokens, say most likely next 3-5 tokens. 

VOILA BITCH!

In more serious architectures we'll do normalization throughout and also have MLPs after each atteniton layer output. We'll also not do once the attention layer, but 96 times, calling it multihead attention, and we'll have shitloads of layers of it!
